Title: John Evjen: Sinner and Witness

An Uncomfortable Gift to the AFLC

\section{Forward}

If a principal may not be tested, then it may not truly be believed either—only repeated.

Evjen was an engineer at heart. I see many of my engineering instincts in his writings. He was fastidious to a fault. A man who latched onto a single idea and worked on it for years. The source texts were consulted at length; dog-eared pages, notes in the margins, piles of notes. The idea is placed under a microscope, twisted, pulled, broken, and reassembled until there is clarity.  

Without question Evjen admired and respected Georg Sverdrup. He dedicated a significant portion of his life Defending Sverdrup's work. The contents of this book document his work starting in 1910 leading to 1918. I would argue that significant work was done before 1910 as Evjen's 1910 polemic piece is fully.

Sverdrup, and later Evjen are struggling to define the boundaries between faithful adherence to the Word, dogmatics, and polity. All of this is done at the level of congregation which is defined as the proper form of the congregation, the kingdom of God, on earth.

With that said, why is Evjen such a controversial figure in the AFLC history?

Evjen was a systematist attempting to define the terms, place the idea within a greater structure, document the consequences, and place clear warning labels on the load bearing beams.

Make no mistake: you and I as faithful members of the AFLC are standing on those same load-bearing beams today.

We asks the same question we should ask ourselves today.

Can we identify the beams and do we understand how much weight they carry today? What happens if one fails or if we start to move the load-bearing walls? As a test case, many of you have read Veith's work, in practice, we think and act in Luther's mask of God. Suppose we amend the Fundamental Principles to our stated principles closer to our actions. It's a dangerous polity question unless we fully understand the structure.  

This is the uncomfortable gift that John Evjen has given the AFLC. With an engineer's mind he stress-tests the fundamental principles starting with the first:
 
\begin{quote}
According to the Word of God, the congregation is the right form of the Kingdom of God on earth. 
\end{quote}

Before we continue, you must understand that Evjen is a flawed witness to the AFLC principles. In this book you will see his academic tenacity, his imbalance that many found disturbing, and his unwillingness to yield. He is no hero, any more than Sverdrup or Oftedal were heroes. Yet, these flawed men speak to us today. We stand in wonder at the boundaries they establish for our congregations.

But like a fence in the woods, we forget why it is there. 

Do not remove Chesterton's fence!

P1 is too strong a claim to survive on sentiment. Without a living apologetic, it will either be rejected by wider Lutheran instincts or reduced within the AFLC to the vague language of “spirit and life” that Evjen opposed again and again.

This is the uncomfortable gift, that Evjen has given the AFLC. 




\section{Contents}

This book contains four sections:

* "A Contribution to the Understanding of Professor Georg Sverdrup and His Selected Writings": The text originally appeared in Folkebladet, May 4, 11, and 18, 1910. It was later bound into a small pamphlet by the Free Church Book Concern or Minneapolis, Minnesota.

* "Guidance: The Principles of the Lutheran Free Church": This is a collection of writings by Sverdrup and Oftedal compiled by Evjen. It was published in book form in 1914 by the Free Church Book Concern or Minneapolis, Minnesota. 

* "The Position": This is a an 11-part argument written by Evjen. It appears in Folkebladet March 13 to May 22 1918.

* "The Editors": This includes materials written by the Folkebladet editors. There is important to understand the back and forth arguments Evjen makes with the Editors in "The Position."  
  

Note that "Guidance" does not contain any comments by Evjen. It is a mystery as there is not even a foreword explaining why these particular Sverdrup and Oftdal writings were selected. The inclusion of Oftedal's Hennepin Country affidavit was odd. From "The Position," we learn that Evjen used this material as a textbook while he was teaching at seminary.




\subsection{Definitions}

When we say that the congregation is the body of Christ here on earth, we are no longer speaking in terms of polity. Instead, we are making a dogmatic claim about the nature of the church.

For our purposes we will use the following definitions:

\begin{itemize}
    \item \textbf{Dogmatics:} What we confess because Scripture teaches it.

    \item \textbf{Ecclesiology:} What we believe Scripture teaches about the nature of the congregation.

    \item \textbf{Polity:} How we organize and operate the congregation. 
\end{itemize}

These three terms are tightly coupled as polity depends on ecclesiology and ecclesiology depends on dogmatics. 

As we read Sverdrup, Oftedal, and Evjen we need to be very careful with these terms. This may sound silly but I recommend you make three notecards, one for each term. As you read this material, select and hold the appropriate card in your hand. Do this for each point. Even better, read that passage again with one of the wrong cards and see how it changes your point of view.

Let's try a few examples:

Example 1: The Bible is the inerrant word of God. 

This is a dogmatic claim describing how we stand under scripture. We may not understand everything, and there are section we may not like. Yet we receive the Word as it is written and struggle together to find meaning and application in our lives.
 

Example 2: We are all sinners. 

This is a dogmatic claim that points the way to Jesus, from Genesis to the Cross. Even our best works appears as filthy rags. Yet Jesus nailed our sins to the cross.


Example 3: Silent Night and Amazing Grace should be sung a cappella.

Let's call this an opiniated and local polity consideration that recognizes that the congregation sings together in such a way as to hear each other. 

Example 4: All member of the congregation are called (have a vocation) to use their gifts to help each other. 

This ecclesiology is encoded into the latter half of the AFLC's principles.


Example 5: The Congregation is the body of Christ. 

This starts out as dogmatics but refuses to stay there. Jesus is not stationary. Instead, he gives spirit and life to the congregation. Polity follows as necessary order to guide the body's members.

% Example 6: Lutherans are confessional.

% This statement is hard to categorize. It is operational statement (dogmatics), but refused to let go of the nature of the church (ecclesiology) because that is what the Luther an believes (dogmatics). Lutherans confess the creeds and the unaltered Augsburg confession. Also, our best hymns point to our sinful nature nature and the promise of the cross.    

 
Example 7: 

Principle 1: "According to the Word of God, right form of the Kingdom of God on earth of the Kingdom of God on earth."

This synthetic statement is complex...


\subsection{Crossing Boundaries with P1}

The first principle is the load bearing beam for the entire AFLC. Unfortunately, it refuses to categorically fit within our definitions. Instead it has elements of all three:


\begin{itemize}
    \item \textbf{According to the Word of God:} This is a dogmatic biblical claim.

    \item \textbf{the congregation is the right form:} This is a dogmatic leading to ecclesiological claim about the nature of the congregation.

    \item \textbf{of the Kingdom of God on earth:} This is ecclesiological description of the visible congregation.  
\end{itemize} 


Finally, we must recognize that P1 does not stand by itself. It carries the weight of the 11 other principles which cast it as a unifying polity statement. Taken together, P1 is a dogmatic authority statement describing the ecclesiological nature of the congregation, with a polity call to duty. 

The bottom line is that P1 is not reducible. We are not going to solve this with a pure biblical claim, nor a clear ecclesiological, nor a clear polity statement. Instead, using today's terminology, the principles are a holistic statement describing the foundations upon which the AFLC is built. 

This is why those notecards are so important as we need to be very careful with our AFLC apologetics. The principles are like a stair stepped claim with lived consequences. It goes something like this:
\begin{itemize}
   \item Authority is given in the Word.
   \item Authority shapes the visible congregation.
   \item The congregation has a mission and acts with spirit and life.
\end{itemize} 





* The congregation is central and cannot be 




Scripture has authority.
That authority shapes what the church is.
What the church is shapes how it must live.
Therefore the congregation cannot be treated as just one useful arrangement among many.

That is not necessarily cultic. It is just high-pressure theology.

The “windy” part comes from the fact that the argument keeps changing levels without announcing it. It moves from:

doctrine
to church nature
to church order
to practical consequences






 (organization)    




****

dogmatics vs polity
essence vs form
visible vs invisible
slogan vs argument
principle vs apologetic
inheritance vs understanding


****
I suspect the modern reader has a hard time as they don't swim in the same water as Sverdrup. Making clear dogmatic definitions (Sverdrup statement) up front should help orient the reader. Hell, I'm not the sharpest crayon in the box and it took many work weeks to reach this point.

****

The modern reader does not naturally inhabit Sverdrup’s theological world. For that reason, I have chosen to state several dogmatic definitions at the outset. Without them, the argument that follows is too easily misheard in modern categories.




It is an ecclesiological constitution.

because the church is this, therefore the congregation must be ordered this way.


define terms and set boundaries specifically for Dogmatics, polity, and maybe even call out the christian trendance tyo be nice.


ecclesiology




It should act more like a frame around a difficult witness. Something like:

Evjen was not balanced.
He was not safe.
He was not victorious.
But he saw something that may still matter.





2. The congregation consists of believers who, by using the means of grace and the spiritual gifts as directed by the Word of 
God, seek salvation and eternal blessedness for themselves and for their fellow men. 
3. According to the New Testament, the congregation needs an external organization with membership roll, election of 
officers, stated times and places for its gatherings, and other similar provisions. 
4. Members of the organized congregation are not, in every instance, believers, and such members often derive false hope 
from their external connection with the congregation. It is therefore the sacred obligation of the congregation to purify 
itself by the quickening preaching of the Word of God, by earnest admonition and exhortation, and by expelling the openly 
sinful and perverse. 
5. The congregation directs its own affairs, subject to the authority of the Word and Spirit of God, and acknowledges no 
other ecclesiastical authority or government above itself. 
6. A free congregation esteems and cherishes all the spiritual gifts which the Lord gives for its edification, and seeks to 
stimulate and encourage their use. 
7. A free congregation gladly accepts the mutual assistance which congregations can give one another in the work for the 
advancement of the Kingdom of God. 
8. Such assistance consists partly in the mutual sharings of spiritual gifts among the congregations through conferences, 
exchange visits, lay activities, etc., whereby congregations are mutually edified, and partly in the voluntary and Spirit
prompted cooperation of congregations for the accomplishing of such tasks as exceed the ability of the individual 
congregation. 
9. Among such tasks may be mentioned specifically the training of pastors, distribution of Bibles and other Christian 
literature, home missions, foreign missions, Jewish missions, deaconess homes, children’s homes and other work of mercy. 
10. Free congregations have no right to demand that other congregations shall submit to their opinion, will, judgment, or 
decision: therefore, domination by a majority of congregations over a minority is to be rejected. 
11. Agencies found desirable for conducting the joint activities of congregations, such as conferences, committees, officers, 
etc., cannot in a Lutheran Free Church impose any obligations or restrictions, exert any compulsions, or lay any burden 
upon the individual congregation, but have the right only to make recommendations to, and requests of, congregations 
and individuals 
12. Every free congregation, as well as every individual believer, is constrained by the Spirit of God and by the privileges of 
Christian love to do good and to work for the salvation of souls and the quickening of the spiritual life, as far as its abilities 
and power permit. Such free spiritual activity is limited neither by parish nor by synodical boundaries.









the congregation in its proper form

Deeply skeptical of unsupported claims. Prone to irritability. 
  
man who drives other people nuts.

Explain the historical setting.
Locate Evjen in Augsburg and the 1918 fight.
State plainly why he is flawed and still worth reading.
Show the reader what question to watch for as they enter the text.

That is enough for a real book if the editorial hand is strong.

The key is that the foreword must not try to do everything. It should not become a substitute for the unwritten big book. 




*************************************

Evjen’s roadmap for understanding P1 looks like this:

First, do not assume you already understand it. He explicitly says P1 especially needs attention, asks whether everyone understands it, and says it is legitimate to ask whether the authors could have been mistaken. He also says you cannot evade the problem by redefining P1 as the unorganized holy catholic church, because “that is precisely what it does not do.”

Second, read P1 together with the surrounding principles, not in isolation. He says objections from Principle 4 must be handled in connection with Principle 1. That means P1 has to be read as part of a structure, not as a slogan.

Third, state positively what P1 is claiming. Evjen gives a very concrete paraphrase: the congregation is original, the church body derived; the local congregation has God’s Word over it, Christ as head, the Spirit as guide, and no other authority over it. He also says P1 is directed against both large ecclesiastical organizations and the dissolving of the church into isolated individuals.

Fourth, distinguish carefully. This is one of his main interpretive tools. He distinguishes:
the essence of the kingdom from the essence of the congregation,
the outward form of the kingdom from the form of the congregation,
the outward congregation from outward organization,
and congregation according to essence from congregation according to form. He even says the editor’s failure is largely a failure to keep those distinctions straight.

Fifth, interpret the authors by the authors. He says, “author interprets author,” and points to Sverdrup and Oftedal’s own statements as the first guide. He also says his aim has been fidelity to what they meant, not premature claims about final scriptural correctness.

Sixth, use the wider literature on church polity and church history. This is a major part of his roadmap. He says one finds light not chiefly in dogmatics but in polity literature and church history, and goes so far as to say he cannot see how anyone can rightly assess Sverdrup without acquaintance with older Congregationalist polity and Sohm.

Seventh, return from that broader reading to Scripture and test P1 fairly. Evjen does not stop at historical reconstruction. He says the principles must be studied, discussed, clarified, compared with related literature, and only then fairly tested as to whether they stand wholly on the ground of Scripture.





***************

Yes. If you want an AFLC apologetic chain for understanding P1, I think Evjen’s logic can be pulled into a fairly tight sequence.

I would state it like this:

1. Start with the claim that the church must not be reduced either to big ecclesiastical machinery or to isolated believers.
Evjen says Sverdrup and Oftedal are arguing against both errors at once: against church-bodies as if they were the church in the biblical sense, and against pietism that dissolves the church into individuals. The church must exist in the form of congregations.

2. Therefore the local congregation is not merely useful; it is the proper outward form of Christ’s church on earth.
This is the core move. After 1876, Evjen says Sverdrup came to teach that the local congregation is itself “God’s house” and “Christ’s body,” while other ecclesiastical organizations are only useful organs or historical arrangements. That is the heart of P1.

3. Therefore church-bodies, synods, and associations are derivative, not primary.
They may serve the congregation, but they are not divine in the same sense. The congregation is “original”; the church body is “derived.” The congregation has Christ as head and the Spirit as guide, but “no other authority over it.”

4. Therefore P1 is a church-polity principle, not a vague devotional slogan.
Evjen is adamant here: P1 is not an “ideal,” not a free-floating demand, and not merely dogmatics. It is a constitutional principle belonging to ethics and practical theology, that is, to church polity.

5. Therefore Scripture must be treated as normative for polity, not only for doctrine.
This is one of the key apologetic moves. Against Schmidt and the broader Lutheran instinct, Sverdrup and Oftedal insist that the New Testament binds Christians in matters of congregation and church order no less than doctrine.

6. Therefore the universal priesthood must be applied visibly, not merely invisibly.
Evjen says the highest principle behind the Guiding Principles is the universal priesthood, but S. and O. applied it not just to the invisible church, but to the visible body of Christ, the congregation. In AFLC terms, this is where apologetics has to show that lay equality is not anti-church, but built into the church’s true form.

7. Therefore salvation of souls and the congregation’s proper form are related but not identical.
This is crucial. Evjen says the salvation of the individual is always central, but that alone does not automatically yield a congregation in the sense of P1. Awakening by itself does not produce the church in its proper form.

8. Therefore the congregation must be understood as the arena where gifts of grace are actually exercised.
For Sverdrup, the congregation is not just a container for believers. It is the place where gifts are unfolded and used. Evjen quotes him to the effect that “without the congregation, the gifts of grace have no attachment and no purpose.” This is one of the strongest practical arguments for P1.

9. Therefore “two or three” language must be handled carefully.
Evjen’s reading is not that any two believers automatically constitute the congregation in the full P1 sense. Rather, they become congregation according to essence when they gather around Word and Sacrament, and according to form when the outward organization follows. That distinction matters for AFLC apologetics because it prevents both hyper-spiritualism and empty formalism.

10. Therefore the key distinctions must be preserved.
This may be the most useful apologetic move of all. Evjen thinks confusion reigns because people blur:

kingdom vs congregation
essence vs form
outward congregation vs outward organization
mission situation vs constituted congregation
If those distinctions collapse, P1 becomes mush.

11. Therefore the AFLC claim is not merely “we like congregationalism.”
The actual claim is stronger: the congregation is the right divine order within Christian religion, the proper form in which Christ’s body is manifested, and the church-body is justified only as an instrument serving that reality.

12. Therefore P1 must first be understood historically and authorially before it is tested biblically.
Evjen’s method is: first understand what Sverdrup and Oftedal meant; then test whether it fully stands on Scripture. He is explicit that he is defending the meaning of P1, not automatically declaring its absolute validity.

If you want that compressed into a one-paragraph AFLC apologetic thesis, I would write it like this:

P1 argues that Christ’s church on earth is not properly realized either as a mere invisible fellowship of believers or as a large governing church-body, but in the local congregation gathered around Word and Sacrament, where the universal priesthood becomes concrete, the gifts of grace are exercised, and Christ’s body takes its proper outward form; therefore synods and associations are secondary instruments, not the primary divine form of the church.

And if you want the apologetic pressure points — the places critics will attack — they are these:

Is the local congregation really called Christ’s body in this strong sense, rather than only the whole church?
Does the New Testament truly provide binding polity, or only doctrine?
Does applying the universal priesthood this way collapse into older Congregationalism?
Is there tension or “dualism” inside the principles themselves?

So yes: the causal chain is there. Evjen does not give it as a clean numbered primer, but the material is strong enough to reconstruct one.


**********************

That is a much more unstable and intellectually honest project than simple AFLC slogan-defense.

The startling part is that Evjen is not saying, “Here is P1, therefore submit.” He is saying something closer to:

Understand it exactly.
Trace its logic.
Locate its historical relatives.
Then test it without fear.

That is why he feels both deeply loyal to Sverdrup and strangely unprotective of him.

The really explosive implication is this: if AFLC apologetics took Evjen seriously, it could not stop at “the congregation is the proper form.” It would also have to ask:

 * what exactly does that mean?
 * what does it exclude?
 * what does it require?
 * is it fully scriptural?
 * did Sverdrup overstate it?
 * would Sverdrup himself have revised it?

That is not normal institutional memory. That is live theological work.


****

%The greatest risk is not simply that Sverdrup is canonized, but that Sverdrup is canonized in a way that prevents P1 from being clearly understood, historically situated, and honestly tested by Scripture.



“The local congregation is the first court of diagnosis, because it lives nearest the facts

******

It reads less like a cult once the pieces are laid out, and more like a very tightly wound chain of reasoning:

Scripture has authority.
That authority shapes what the church is.
What the church is shapes how it must live.
Therefore the congregation cannot be treated as just one useful arrangement among many.

That is not necessarily cultic. It is just high-pressure theology.

The “windy” part comes from the fact that the argument keeps changing levels without announcing it. It moves from:

doctrine
to church nature
to church order
to practical consequences

That makes the reader feel like the conclusion appeared by magic, when really it arrived by a staircase hidden in the wall.

That is probably your real editorial task: not to prove every graduate-level step, but to show the staircase clearly enough that normal readers can see how the conclusion is reached.

A good plain sentence for that would be:

Taken one step at a time, the claim sounds less strange. The difficulty is that the argument moves through several levels at once—doctrine, the nature of the church, and church order—so the conclusion can seem stronger than the reader is prepared for.

Or even simpler:

The claim sounds extreme when stated all at once. It sounds less extreme when the steps leading to it are laid out clearly.

That may be the exact bridge your section needs.